SPECX notes (for JCMT/UKIRT newsletter)

Frequency and velocity scales in SPECX
______________________________________

INTRODUCTION

Traditionally, radio spectral-line analysis programs have displayed velocities
with respect to the Local Standard of Rest (LSR), using the radio definition of
velocity. It is now possible to observe at JCMT using Heliocentric, Barycentric
and Telluric velocity frames, and optical and relativistic velocity
definitions, and SPECX V6.2 (now released to Starlink) contains the appropriate
facilities for dealing with such data. 

Before describing what SPECX does, it is necessary to review, briefly, what is
required (see also ref[1]). We all know that any relative velocity between
source and observer gives rise to a corresponding Doppler shift in the received
frequency. For *small* velocities, then, radioastronomers (who think in
frequencies) write 

            nu/nu_0          =   (c-v)/c   =   -v/c,   ............1

where v is the velocity *away* from the observer. Likewise, optical astronomers
write a similar formula in wavelengths: 

           lambda_0/lambda   =   c/(c+v)   =   v/c.     ...........2

Finally, it seems that extragalactic observers believe in special relativity,
which of course tells us that: 

           nu/nu_0           = sqrt[(c-v)/(c+v)].    ..............3

(ignoring the smaller doppler shift due to any transverse component of
velocity). By a simple application of the binomial theorem, we can see that
these are all equivalent for v << c. A problem arises because these equations
are used in reverse to *define* a velocity, and this definition is often used
where the approximations in (1) or (2) are inadmissable. Even the (special)
relativistic formula applies only in *local* frames, which are not the same
thing at all as distant cosmological frames. So none of these formula are
"right". 

Normally we reduce our velocities to one of a few commonly agreed standards:
Radio astronomers prefer the Local Standard of Rest (LSR); extragalactic
astronomers apparently prefer a Heliocentric system, whilst for some purposes,
such as instrument or atmospheric diagnostics it may be the Telluric frame that
is of most interest. Or indeed we may have some favourite other frame which is
defined with respect to one of these "standard" frames. One that is used quite
often is the source frame --- for example, if we want the frequency scale to be
that appropriate to a non-moving source we have to transform all telluric
(observed) frequencies to a frame comoving with the source. In the case of
Orion for example this is 9 km/s wrt the LSR, and few of us know the 
heliocentric velocity. 

Thus our velocity scale is specified by four parameters:
       i.   The velocity transformation law.
       ii.  The rest frequency or wavelength used in the law.
       iii. The standard frame, and
       iv.  The reference velocity expressed in that frame.
Here I use the general term "frame" to imply this full specification.

OBSERVATION AND DISPLAY OF LINE SPECTRA.

There are two separate issues. First, we need to *observe* such that the line
of interest actually occurs within the passband of the instrument (normally,
but not always, at the centre of the passband). For a heterodyne receiver we do
this by adjusting the local oscillator frequency by an amount equal to the
*total* doppler frequency shift expected for the line. Second, we then need to
*display* the spectrum. Unfortunately, the spectrometer is back on Earth, at
the telescope, so we need to map the I.F. frequencies of individual spectrometer
channels onto velocity (or frequency) space in some other chosen frame. This
`display' frame need not necessarily be the same as the `observation' frame.
For example, whatever the observation frame, we may wish to display the output
in one of several standard frames:

(i)    In the telluric frame, where the frequencies of spurious responses in
       the I.F. passband (for example) can be measured, and with any luck,
       disposed of. Or we may wish to measure absolute frequency in this frame
       to identify telluric (atmospheric) emission and/or absorption features.
(ii)   In the frame of the source (e.g., at a velocity of V_lsr offset
       with respect to the LSR frame itself), when we wish to measure the 
       absolute frequency of some spectral feature, in case it is a spectral
       line of some species other than the one we desired.
(iii)  In the LSR frame, if we want to determine a velocity to use for distance
       measurements within the galaxy.
(iv)   In a heliocentric frame for velocity determinations of external galaxies
       (I am told that this is the normal way of doing this.)

The solution adopted in SPECX is to view all calculations of velocity and/or
frequency as a two stage process. In the first, the spectral header information
is used to calculate the telluric centre frequency of the observation. That is,
we deduce the true frequency as measured at the telescope of a signal appearing
in the centre channel of the spectrometer. SPECX then produces an `X-array'
which contains, for each spectrometer channel, the telluric frequency
corresponding to that channel. Finally, this array is transformed back to the
display frame. By default the display frame is the same as the observation
frame, which is encoded in the SPECX and GSD scan headers, but it may be
changed to any other frame if you like. 

To summarize: SPECX will normally display the data using the velocity frame
in which it was observed; however you can use SET-VELOCITY-FRAME to select
another frame, and optionally you can use SET-LINE-REST-FREQ to choose another
reference frequency for the velocity transformation. Current options for
frames include LSR, Geocentric, Heliocentric and Telluric, and you have a
choice of Radio, Optical and Relativistic velocity laws. Because of the
bewildering number of combinations of these variables, the header on the
X-axis of the plot has been modified to give a full specification.

COMPLICATIONS. 1: Displaying the other sideband.

The command CHANGE-SIDEBAND does the following: First, it calculates the
telluric centre frequency. Then it adds or subtracts twice the I.F. (depending
on whether the observations are in LSB or USB respectively). Finally, it
transforms this telluric frequency to the nominal frame of the observation,
files it as F_CEN in the scan header, and changes the sense of the frequency
step in the spectrometer (F_INC). GSD spectra stored with storage task V6 or
earlier do not have the local oscillator frequency stored, so SPECX instead
asks you for the current sideband and I.F.; for V7 data or later SPECX can
deduce these from the data in the GSD scan header. 

Let us take a specific example. We have a RxB3i spectrum which is centred on CS
7-6 (rest freq. 342.883 GHz) in the lower sideband.  The nominal I.F. is 1.5
GHz. In order to look at absolute "rest frame" frequencies, we set the display
frame to be that of the source itself: 

    >> set-velocity-frame
    Output in different vel frame? (Y/N) [Y] 
    Velocity frame? (TELLuric, LSR, HELIocentric, GEOcentric) [TELL] LSR
    Velocity law definition? (OPTical, RADio, RELativistic) [RAD] RAD
    Velocity in new frame? (km/s) [  20.0] vlsr

(see Fig 1). (There is a predefined variable "vlsr" equated to the actual value
for the current spectrum, so we can quote this in response to the last query
rather than looking up the actual value.) 

For an AOSC spectrum, we would now regrid to a linear scale (see next section
for more details on this). Then we go ahead and change the sideband:

    >> change-sideband
    Local oscillator frequency not defined...
    Current sideband? (U/L) [L] L
    First i.f.? (GHz) [ 1.500000] 1.5

     --- Header entries changed to other sideband ---
       Don't forget to SET-LINE-REST-FREQ to set the
       frequency of the line you wanted to look at -
       the old line will appear at large velocities!

As suggested, change the reference frequency to CO 3-2:

    >> set-line-rest-freq
    Receiver # 1  Line rest frequency? (GHz) [  0.000000] 345.795989

If we have done all this correctly we now get the absolute frequency plot
shown below (Fig 2). A macro has been provided to do all this -- just type
IMAGE-FREQ (this calls specx_command:image.spx).

COMPLICATIONS. 2: AOSC

It is well known that the frequency scales of Acousto-Optical spectrometers
tend to be non-linear. To this end, the SPECX frequency calculation stuff
contains a facility for correcting the frequency using a polynomial fit to the
frequency error. For AOSC, the cubic term dominates, and the maximum error is
about 0.6 MHz, but for somewhat complicated reasons, there is an *additional*
zero-order (d.c.) term of some 11 or 12 channels, or about 3 MHz. The
implication of this is that a line you might expect to come out in the centre
channel (1024.5) of the spectrum will actually emerge some 3 MHz away, and to
compensate for this the GSD header files correct the reference-frame observed
frequency, F_CEN, appropriately. This makes the display work fine, but has
implications for when we want to look at image frequencies (as will be shown in
a moment). 

To correct the frequency scale for AOSC data in particular, I have written a
small macro, FRQFIX.SPX, which is kept in the "standard" command-files
directory. It is invoked by the symbol LINEARIZE-AOSC-FREQ:

    >> linearize-aosc-freq
    FRQFIX> Linearization turned off - reset it? (Y/N) [Y] Y
    OK, setting freq coefficients
    FRQFIX> Regrid to uniform sampling? (Y/N) [Y] Y
     -- AOS frequency scale linearization applied --
    First and last useful channels in input:           1        2038
    Linearization has now been turned off!
    Reset if another spectrum needs correcting

This macro in fact *also* removes the 3-MHz offset from F_CEN, instead adding
it into the zero-order term of the correction polynomial, which simplifies
calculation of the I.F.  LINEARIZE also does various checks and tidies up
the program flags. If you choose to REGRID the data at this point you transform
the data to a truly linear scale (in current units). Otherwise the data will
still display correctly, as long as you have the linearization turned on (set
fcorrect=true or use SET-X). 

If you now want to look at the other sideband of AOSC data, remember that the
effective I.F. at the centre of the passband is not what you might think it is,
but is actually 1.503 GHz (or 3.943 GHz for RxA1 or RxB2). If on the other hand
you apply the LINEARIZE-AOSC macro the data will be regridded onto a linear
scale *and shifted to the nominal channel*. In this case the I.F. is the
standard 1.5 or 3.94 GHz. There is one Awful Warning: you cannot apply
linearization to data *after* you have done a CHANGE-SIDE. That flips the
spectrometer frequency scale, and so will apply the correction 'the wrong way
round'. So after you have done a CHANGE-SIDE, make sure that linearization is
turned off, either through SET-X or by typing "fcorrect=false". 

I thank Per Friberg, Goeran Sandell and Chris Mayer for their help in untangling
this mess, Louis Noreau for pointing out the need for other velocity frames and
scaling laws, and Paul Feldman for bringing other infelicities in the velocity
and frequency scaling to my attention. The system in SPECX V6.2 has been
written from scratch, and so does not have 10 years of testing behind it;
please bring any demonstrable faults to my attention. (I do not have Donald
Knuth's confidence, and do not offer a steadily increasing reward for each bug
found in my code.) 

Efficient map-making
____________________

Finally, a brief note about map-making. People are making some really quite
big maps. SPECX tries to hold the entire cube in virtual memory at one time,
and in fact with various permutations of INTERPOLATE and ROTATE, may want to
have up to 3 copies of the cube resident. If excessive paging is to be avoided,
then it is desirable that all these fit into the available physical memory of
the machine (the working set). The usual consequence if they do not is that
the whole machine grinds to a halt, without any apparent error...

You can minimize the amount of virtual memory required by only mapping those
spectral channels of interest. Use TRUNCATE (or DROP-CHANNELS) to dispense with
spectral channels lying far away from the line; use BIN-SPECTRUM where you have
higher resolution than you need. Even if you have plenty of memory to spare,
you can greatly speed up the map-making process by using as few channels as
possible. To reinforce this point, when you do an OPEN-MAP you are now asked
explicitly for the number of spectral channels in the cube. You can also
eliminate one cube from memory altogether by using 'interpolation-on-demand'
(an option in INTERPOLATE-MAP), albeit at the cost of slightly increased time
to make any particular map. 

As noted in the manual, SPECX maps are really channel maps, and no information
is stored in the header about individual spectra. Thus if you want to map data
taken in the other sideband from that of the map header, or taken with a
different spectrometer etc, you first need to INVERT, SHIFT, TRUNCATE etc to
get your spectrum into the right form. There is a new macro that does this
automatically: it can be invoked by the command symbol CONVERT-TO-MAP-FORMAT
(this macro is stored along with all the other standard macros in the directory
with logical name "specx_command".) Just use this command before you ADD-TO-MAP
to convert your current spectrum to the same frequency scaling etc as the map
header. 

Reference:

[1] M.A. Gordon. Chap 6.1 in "Methods of Experimental Physics", vol 12-C,
    (Astrophyics -- Radio Observations). Academic Press, NY, 1976

Rachael Padman

CAVAD::RP1
RACHAEL@UK.AC.CAM.PHY-RAVX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     